Versioning and caching of Worker Tools (#1588)
OctopusDeploy/docs: docs/infrastructure/workers/worker-tools-versioning-and-caching.md

---
title: Worker Tools, Versioning and Caching
description: Worker Tools 
position: 50
---

> Worker Tools are a set of docker images used as [execution containers for workers](https://octopus.com/docs/projects/steps/execution-containers-for-workers)] to run deployment processes. Worker Tools include a wide range of software tools with the aim of supporting a majority of deployment scenarios out of the box. This post focuses on how we create these Worker Tool images, version, cache on workers and release them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Worker Tools are a set of docker images used as [execution containers for workers](https://octopus.com/docs/projects/steps/execution-containers-for-workers) to run deployment processes. Worker Tools include a wide range of software tools to support most deployment scenarios out of the box. This page focuses on how we create these Worker Tool images, version, cache on workers, and release them.
```

## Versioning Worker Tools

> Worker Tool images, follow a semantic versioning (SemVer) approach of `Major.Minor.Patch-Distro` for their tag format. When we release a new version of Worker Tools to the [Worker Tools dockerhub repository](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/worker-tools/tags) we also add the following image tags, distribution (`ubuntu.18.04` or `windows.ltsc2019`), `Major-Distro` and `Major.Minor-Distro`. We recommend using the fully qualified SemVer as patch updates of Worker Tools could result in an updated tool depenedncy introducing a breaking change.

Reviewer 2: For `Major-Distro` and so on, perhaps provide an "`(e.g. )`" to make it easier to understand?

The Worker Tools Dockerfiles use a combination of tools pinned to specifc versions such as CLI tools, Frameworks while other tools pull their latest avaliable release, for Ubuntu these are pulled with apt-get and for Windows chocolatey. You can find the full details of these tools in the docker files for [Windows](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/WorkerTools/blob/master/windows.ltsc2019/Dockerfile) and [Ubuntu](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/WorkerTools/blob/master/ubuntu.18.04/Dockerfile) Worker Tools.

The tools pulling their latest releases for Ubuntu include `wget`, `python3-pip`, `groff`, `unzip`, `apt-utils`, `curl`, `software-properties-common`, `jq`, `yq`, `openssh-client`, `rsync`, `git`, `augeas-tools`, `maven`, `gradle`, `Node 14`, `istioctl`, `linkerd `, `umoci`.

For Windows these include `chocolatey` and `dotnet core 3.1.*`.

> If you depend on any of these packages we recommend you target the fully qualified SemVer of Worker Tools. Otherwise our additional Worker Tools tags may be suitable for your use case. We version our releases as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you depend on any of these packages, we recommend you target the fully qualified SemVer of Worker Tools. Otherwise, our additional Worker Tools tags may be suitable for your use case. We version our releases as follows:
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe `... your steps depend on ...` is a bit clearer than `... you depend on...`?

Major update
* Update of a pinned tools major version
* Any update of a pinned tool with a 0 Major version i.e. `0.*.*`
* Removal of a tool

Minor Update
* Update of a pinned tools minor version
* Addition of a new tool

Patch update
* Update of a pinned tools Patch version
* Any new release, the latest tools will be updated automatically

> In short we recommend using the full `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:Major.Minor.Patch-Distro` tag format. Depending on your use case the latest releases, `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:ubuntu.18.04` and `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:windows.ltsc2019` respectivly or `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:Major-distro`, `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:Major.Minor-Distro` may be suitable for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In short, we recommend using the full `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:Major.Minor.Patch-Distro` tag format. Depending on your use case, the latest releases, `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:ubuntu.18.04` and `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:windows.ltsc2019` respectively or `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:Major-distro`, `octopusdeploy/worker-tools:Major.Minor-Distro` may be suitable for you.
```

## Caching Worker Tools

> Worker Tools are cached on dynamic workers to help improve the performance of deployments. Windows workers cache the latest 2 sets of Worker Tools while Ubuntu workers cache the latest 5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Worker Tools are cached on dynamic workers to help improve the performance of deployments. Windows workers cache the latest two sets of Worker Tools while Ubuntu workers cache the latest five.
```

> To understand this cache it's important to understand a workers life-cycle. Workers are acquired from a dynamic worker pool and leased to a single cloud instance. They are allocated in a round robin fashion to individual deployment steps, storing packages, docker images and other data on disk. Workers are destroyed after either the worker has been idle for 60 minutes or has existed for 72 hours (3 days). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand this cache, it's important to understand a worker's life cycle. Workers are acquired from a dynamic worker pool and leased to a single cloud instance. They are allocated in a round robin fashion to individual deployment steps, storing packages, docker images, and other data on disk. Workers are destroyed after either the worker has been idle for 60 minutes or has existed for 72 hours (3 days). 
```

> When a new worker is acquired if a new set of Worker Tools has been released the worker will no longer have the oldest version of Worker Tools and any other images pulled on the old worker. This is important for the performance of deployments as pull times for uncached Worker Tools are ~1.5 minutes for Ubuntu and ~20 minutes for Windows. We reccomend updating to the latest set of Worker Tools avaliable to avoid these pull times. By Caching multiple versions of Worker Tools when using the latest version any new release of Worker Tools will not result in degraded deployment performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new worker is acquired, if a new set of Worker Tools has been released, the worker will no longer have the oldest version of Worker Tools, and any other images pulled on the old worker. This is important for the performance of deployments as pull times for uncached Worker Tools are ~1.5 minutes for Ubuntu and ~20 minutes for Windows. We recommend updating to the latest set of Worker Tools available to avoid these pull times. By Caching multiple versions of Worker Tools when using the latest version, any new release of Worker Tools will not result in degraded deployment performance.
```

To update to the latest set of Worker Tools select the "Use latest Distro-based image" 

![](images/container-selector.png "width=500")

## Currently Cached Worker Tools

**Octopus worker-tools cached on Dynamic Workers**

> The `octopusdeploy/worker-tools` images provided for the execution containers feature cache the five latest Ubuntu and 2 latest Windows images on a Dynamic Worker when it's created. This makes them a great choice over installing additional software on a Dynamic worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `octopusdeploy/worker-tools` images provided for the execution containers feature cache the five latest Ubuntu and two latest Windows images on a Dynamic Worker when it's created. This makes them an excellent choice over installing additional software on a Dynamic worker.
```

The following worker-tools images are cached:

**On Linux Workers**:

> - `!docker-image <octopusdeploy/worker-tools:ubuntu.18.04>` ([Latest Linux-based image](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/WorkerTools/blob/master/ubuntu.18.04))

Reviewer 2: Since now we dynamically choose versions to cache, shall we just outline the process we use to select version, rather than pinning particular versions here? The selection process also considers any ad-hoc versions for suppression or addition, so the end result may differ from what are described here (which may be seen as promises).

Or we should at least mention that these versions are LIKELY to be cached, but the final result also depends on free disk space and so on.

Author: I spoke to Aashiq about this and we both agreed that keeping it simple and clear for customers was more important than giving all the details. At the moment the disk space requirements will just fail the VM image build, so I don't think customers need to know the disk space limitation. Currently, it is the latest N images and unless we go and change the suppressed versions this list will be accurate. I have a preference for leaving this as is but if you still feel otherwise happy to chat

> - `!docker-image <octopusdeploy/worker-tools:ubuntu.18.04>-1`

Reviewer: Is this format correct? Or something new to docsync? The resultant display shows them with `-1` etc verbatim:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1418993/178938878-42f59f40-ab8d-4ca7-afd0-b116cb6ea5f5.png)

Author: I've created a PR in DocSync to support this format 🙂 https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/DocSync/pull/7
